now Palestinians in Gaza are in the
middle of a humanitarian catastrophe of
Epic Proportions that's according to the
international labor organization the UN
agency says the effect of Israel's war
uh on the lives and livelihoods across
the occupied Palestinian territories is
unlike anything seen before the ILO says
192,000 Palestinians in Gaza have lost
their jobs since October that is about
66% of total employment in the strip the
Ripple effects of Israel's Onslaught on
Gaza are being felt across the occupied
West Bank about a third of the labor
force is now unemployed the highest rate
in decades the ILO saying at least
276,000 jobs or
32% of employment opportunities are
simply gone in total nearly half a
million Palestinians have lost their
jobs across the occupied territories
that means the loss of more than $20
million in Daily
wages well Peter raker is Deputy
Regional director for Arab states at the
international uh labor organization uh
thanks very much uh for being with us he
joins us from Geneva um so this a pretty
sobering St set of Statistics there but
I want to ask you specifically about the
effect this has in the occupied West
Bank which is in another part of the
occupied territories far from from Gaza
talk to us a little bit about the
KnockOn effect of the uh uh war in Gaza
and how is that how that is leading to
the loss of jobs for Palestinians in the
West
Bank certainly thank you for having me
look it's uh it's clear that in Gaza as
you mentioned right two-thirds of jobs
have been wiped out but there's an
immediate knock on effect also on the
West Bank we've seen the West Bank also
massive loss of jobs estimates are that
onethird of jobs have been lost there
and that's for a number of reasons it's
restrictions of movement it's a massive
drop in consumption people don't have
money to spend because there's no wages
being paid private sector but also those
working in the public sector have lost
or not gotten their whole wages further
is of course knock on effect because
there's also been lots of workers
expelled from Israel so in the West Bank
itself there's a massive impact on jobs
lost it also means that overall in
Palestine on a daily basis $2.5 million
of income of wages are not being paid
and of course this things were pretty
bad uh for for Palestinians before uh
this conflict began weren't
they I think the labor market in
Palestine West Bank and also Gaza was
already very depressed before the crisis
in Gaza unemployed was skyh high because
the years of the blockade so indeed we
started from a very very difficult
situation already now has really been
compounded and of course the net effect
will be many people be in poverty for
possibly many months of years to come
because of this
crisis and what do you Fe might happen
the longer this goes
on basically many people in Gaza and
also West Bank will have no income no
wages nobody's going to pay them any
money they're going to have to rely
increasingly International assistance
unfortunately the authorities have no
public uh financing to provide social
assistance so it's going to have to come
from the outside that's also the
difficult situation because as we know
globally many crisis are raging and the
chances of Palestine receiving
International aided needs are not
necessarily very high the only hope
would be that eventually there's going
to be a settlement a peace settlement
there will be humanitarian and then from
on there there might be a reconstruction
effort and reconstruction could be
helping people to get back into jobs and
income hopefully as soon as possible
people need it desperately right now
indeed good to talk to you Peter raker
from The International labor
organization in Geneva thanks very
much thank you very much